# Guides

## Install guides
### ALVR  
Install ALVR following the [guide](https://github.com/alvr-org/ALVR/wiki/Installation-guide#installation).  
The guide will also ask you to install SteamVR from [Steam](https://store.steampowered.com/app/250820/SteamVR/).


### Clumsy  
Clumsy is a network tool where you can introduce artificial degradation, which is used to gather the user experience in situations where the network connection isn't always the best.

To download clumsy follow the link below.

Source: https://jagt.github.io/clumsy/

### Unity
Install Unity from https://unity.com/download.  
You can download the world with all the packages and plugins from ...

#### SteamVR plugin
You can download the SteamVR plugin from [AssetStore](https://assetstore.unity.com/packages/tools/integration/steamvr-plugin-32647).

#### Ultraleap Hap-E Haptics
You can follow the guide from [Ultraleap](https://docs.ultraleap.com/xr-and-tabletop/xr/unity/getting-started/index.html#set-up-hand-tracking-in-unity).  

---

## Usage guides
### ALVR
- Start ALVR
- Launch the needed version
- Click start SteamVR if it doesn't start automatically
- Make sure the client and server are on the same network/VPN
- See if the client is in the autodiscovery otherwise ``Add Device Manually`` enter the hostname and ip that you see on the client and press ``save``. It should now autoconnect.
- The client should now automatically load into SteamVR and you can start the Unity world if you want to by pressing the run button

### Clumsy
- Start Clumsy
- Select the preset "udp ipv4 against specific ip"
- Enter the client IP found in ALVR fill in the "ip.DstAddr" and "ip.SrcAddr" with this ip
- Press start and introduce the needed degradation 
  
### Logging script
When ALVR is running start the [alvr-socket.py](/scripts/alvr-socket.py) script, using ``py alvr-socket.py`` in the command line, and let it generate a log file.  
To close the script press ctrl+c twice in the terminal.

### Graphing script
To graph the data generated by the [logging script](#Logging-script), run the [json-to-graph.py](/scripts/json-to-graph.py) script and see the newly created .html file which contains the graphs, <b>be sure to give it another name before graphing a new json logging file, as it will overwrite it.</b>

### Questionnaire
The questionnaire is used for turning the user experience into JSON data, such that it can be graphed by a script.  
You can follow the table below for filling in the values based on the experience.
| Question/Score                                          | 1                      | 2   | 3   | 4                         | 5   | 6   | 7                      | 8   | 9   | 10                          |
| ------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------- | --- | --- | ------------------------- | --- | --- | ---------------------- | --- | --- | --------------------------- |
| How much have you used VR before                        | Never                  |     |     | A few times (1–3 times)   |     |     | Moderate use (weekly)  |     |     | Very frequently (daily)     |
| **Feeling (Motion sickness)**                           | Extremely nauseous     |     |     | Noticeable discomfort     |     |     | Slight discomfort      |     |     | No discomfort at all        |
| **Can you still perform the same task you were doing?** | Not at all             |     |     | Somewhat (50% effective)  |     |     | Mostly (75% effective) |     |     | Completely (100% effective) |
| **How usable is it?**                                   | Not usable (0%)        |     |     | Partially usable (40%)    |     |     | Usable with ease (70%) |     |     | Extremely usable (100%)     |
| **Are you able to mitigate the tampering?**             | No, it is too bad (0%) |     |     | Partially mitigated (40%) |     |     | Mostly mitigated (70%) |     |     | Fully mitigated (100%)      |

---

## Exported data reading guides
### Logging script output
After running the VR session and closing the script there will be a folder named alvr-logs made with a json file inside with the statistics logs of that previous session.

It contains the following two entries:
- Statistics data per 1 ms
- Statistics Summary per 500 ms
#### Statistics data per 1 ms
```json
{ 
    "timestamp": "23:38:08.475", 
    "event_type": { 
        "id": "GraphStatistics", 
        "data": { 
            "total_pipeline_latency_s": 0.051938575, 
            "game_time_s": 0.0078286, 
            "server_compositor_s": 0.0001978, 
            "encoder_s": 0.0068522, 
            "network_s": 0.002433477, 
            "decoder_s": 0.010199115, 
            "decoder_queue_s": 0.022944732, 
            "client_compositor_s": 0.001482654, 
            "vsync_queue_s": 0.0, 
            "client_fps": 67.1885, 
            "server_fps": 60.442684, 
            "nominal_bitrate": { 
                "scaled_calculated_bps": null, 
                "decoder_latency_limiter_bps": null, 
                "network_latency_limiter_bps": null, 
                "encoder_latency_limiter_bps": null, 
                "manual_max_bps": null, 
                "manual_min_bps": null, 
                "requested_bps": 30000000.0 
            }, 
            "actual_bitrate_bps": 39449.727 
        } 
    } 
} 
```
##### Value explanation

- **total_pipeline_latency_s**: Total latency in seconds from the time a frame is generated to when it is displayed on the VR headset.
  - **game_time_s**: Time taken by the game engine to generate a frame.
  - **server_compositor_s**: Time taken by the server's compositor to process and prepare the graphics for encoding.
  - **encoder_s**: Time taken by the server encoder to compress the frame for network transmission.
  - **network_s**: Network latency, representing the time taken for the encoded frame data to be sent from the server to the client (VR headset).
  - **decoder_s**: Time taken by the client to decode the incoming compressed frame data.
  - **decoder_queue_s**: Time spent queuing the decoded frame before it is rendered. Longer queue times can indicate buffering delays.
  - **client_compositor_s**: Time spent by the client compositor to integrate the decoded frame with any overlays or UI elements before display.
  - **vsync_queue_s**: Time spent waiting for the VR headset's display to be ready for the next frame.
- **client_fps**: Frame rate at which the VR content is displayed on the client (headset).
- **server_fps**: Frame rate at which frames are generated by the server.
- **requested_bps**: The bitrate that the system requests which is here set to 30 mbps.
- **actual_bitrate_bps**: The actual bitrate achieved during data transmission, unsure is bps or kbps, we can assume it is kbps, because 39 kbps is very low, for VR streaming.

#### Statistics Summary per 500 ms
```json
{ 
    "timestamp": "23:38:08.959", 
    "event_type": { 
        "id": "StatisticsSummary", 
        "data": { 
            "video_packets_total": 84666, 
            "video_packets_per_sec": 60, 
            "video_mbytes_total": 23, 
            "video_mbits_per_sec": 0.00576, 
            "total_latency_ms": 52.106342, 
            "network_latency_ms": 2.3668852, 
            "encode_latency_ms": 7.4662, 
            "decode_latency_ms": 8.548883, 
            "packets_lost_total": 0, 
            "packets_lost_per_sec": 0, 
            "client_fps": 64, 
            "server_fps": 58, 
            "battery_hmd": 100, 
            "hmd_plugged": true 
        } 
    } 
} 
```
##### Value explanation
- **video_packets_total**: The total number of video packets sent so far. Here, 84,666 packets have been sent.
- **video_packets_per_sec**: The current rate of video packets sent per second, measured as 60 packets per second in this data.
- **video_mbytes_total**: The total amount of video data sent, measured in megabytes.
- **video_mbits_per_sec**: The transmission rate of video data in megabits per second.
- **packets_lost_total**: Total number of packets lost during transmission. 0 indicating no packet loss.
- **packets_lost_per_sec**: Number of packets lost per second.
- **battery_hmd**: Current battery level of the VR headset (HMD).
- **hmd_plugged**: Indicates whether the headset is plugged in (`true`) or running on battery (`false`). Here, it is `true`, meaning it is plugged in.

The other values which look the same as for the Statistics data, are the averages of those values.

### Graphs from JSON
Reading the data from the graph, number graphs left to right 1-5:
For word explanation see [Value explanation](#Value-explanation)
1. <b>Total and Network Latency Over Time</b>
  - Contains the total latency and specific network latency, during the test
2. <b>Client and Server Frame Rate Over Time</b>
  - Contains the Client(VR) fps and Server(Laptop) fps at any point during the test
3. <b>Bitrate Over Time</b>
  - Contains the Bitrate in MBps at any point during the test
4. <b>Client Frame Rate vs Network Latency</b>
  - Contains the Client fps as function of the Network latency
5. <b>Bitrate Mbps vs Network Latency</b>
  - Contains the Bitrate as function of the Network latency

### Questionnaire JSON output
Refer to [questionnaire usage guide](#Questionnaire) for the value explanations
